# Dataset Exploration of BTS Flight Data
## by Christine Howard


## Dataset

> I will be working with the Flights dataset, which has data for millions of flights over nearly 2 decades and has a vast amount of information on these flights, including reasons attributed to flight delays. I worked mostly with the flight data from 2005, and made a comparison of delays between 1990 and 2005. The files are extremely large, so comparing multiple years would make this analysis very slow and difficult. I will focus my analysis around contributing factors to both arrival and departure flight delays.


## Summary of Findings

>I started my analysis by completing a univariate exploration, to begin looking into relationships within the data.<br><br>I first had a look at arrival delays in a histogram, and found that the majority of arrival departures were between 4-5 minutes, the next were those around 12-13, and the next were around 22 or so, while delays of about 5-8 minutes were comparably rare, and after about 22 minutes delay, the number of delays drops steadily.<br><br>Then, I took a look to see what day of the week has the largest total number of delays, and found that Fridays had the most delays, closely followed by Thursday, and Saturdays had the least delays.<br><br>Then, I had a look at delays on a month by month basis, and found that the most delays occurred in July, then December, followed by the other summer months and then January. The lowest number of delays appeared to be in September.<br><br>Next, I took a look at the 5 different delay reasons given in the dataset: NAS, carrier, late aircraft, weather and security delays, to find which appeared to be attributed to the most delays. NAS delays were attributed to the largest number of delays in 2005, with carrier and then late aircraft delays following.<br><br>I then had a look at a histogram of actual elapsed time as I was curious to see if flights flew internationally or not, based on how long the flights were.<br><br>After completing my univariate exploration, I continued on to the bivariate exploration.<br><br>I first checked out the correlation between arrival and departure delays in a scatterplot, and was able to see that as predicted, the relationship between these 2 variables was strong and positive.<br><br>I had wished to look at flight diversions to see if these potentially had a correlation with flight delays, but there was unfortunately no information for these in the arrival delay colum, for either the 2005 or 1990 dataset, so I did not analyze this factor.<br><br>I then took a look at the relationship between arrival delay and flight distance using a scatterplot and calculating the correlation coeffecient, and found that the relationship was very weak, so it seemed unlikely that this factor had much of an effect on delays.<br><br>I created heat maps looking at the various delay reasons in relation to both arrival and departure delays, and based on the correlation coeffecients of these variables, the 2 most strongly related to delays were late aircraft delay, and then carrier delay. I then showed these same relationships in a pairgrid with scatterplots, and it was much easier to clearly see correlation in the heatmap than this grid.<br><br>I then looked at departure and arrival delays in terms of the average delay length in minutes for each reason for delay, and found that weather delays actually seemed to overall have the longest delays in terms of minutes.<br><br>Then, I moved on to the multivariate exploration, where first I looked at the relationship between day of the week, delay reason, and minutes of delay. I found that late aircraft delays appear to be the most significant delay on all days except for Wednesday (arrival delays) and Saturday (arrival and departure delays). NAS delays and carrier delays then follow, with NAS delays beating out carrier delays more often for arrival delays than departure delays.<br><br>Next, I looked at the correlation between departure/arrival delay and carrier delay as compared for the top 2 carriers (in terms of delays). I found that the reason for delay was much more likely to be due to the carrier for Delta Airlines than for Southwest airlines.<br><br>Finally, I plotted delayed minutes by month for both 2005 and 1990 in line graphs. I found that 2005 had more delayed minutes than 1990 in all months except for February arrival delays, where 1990 surpassed 2005 very slightly. The general shape of the lines for both years in both graphs are pretty similar, with similar peaks and valleys, except for January-March for both arrival and departure delays.<br><br>

## Key Insights for Presentation

> In exploring similar variables, such as delay reason, and chronological variables such as month and day of the week, from a univariate to a multivariate level, certain trends in the data come to light. The more each of these variables was explored at different levels, the more interesting and strong the insights became. Throughout my analysis, it was clear that flights are more often delayed on Thursdays and Fridays, and in July and August. The reasons for delay differed a bit depending on how you broke down this information: Late aircraft delays seem to be attributed to the longest delays in terms of minutes when looking at this on a day level, while weather delays have on average slightly longer delays than late aircraft delays when looking at delays over a full year. Carrier delays also have the 2nd strongest correlation coeffecient after late aircraft delays, which suggest a strong relationship as well, but when looking at total count of delays (and not in terms of length in minutes), NAS delays have the most, following with carrier delays, and then late aircraft delays. It is therefore important to break down questions into more specific pieces and ask yourself: am I most interested in total count of delays, or length of delays, for arrival or departure delays, and on a daily, monthly, or yearly basis?<br><br>Therefore, for the presentation, I will narrow my sights to just arrival delays, looking at the correlation of these with the various delay reasons, and on a month and day level.

## References

https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-intersection-two-lists/
https://www.transtats.bts.gov/Fields.asp?Table_ID=236
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1720421/how-do-i-concatenate-two-lists-in-python?rq=1
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-remove-duplicates-list/
https://seaborn.pydata.org/generated/seaborn.catplot.html
https://seaborn.pydata.org/generated/seaborn.regplot.html
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57507832/unable-to-allocate-array-with-shape-and-data-type
https://thepythonguru.com/python-string-formatting/
https://matplotlib.org/3.1.1/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.xticks.html